

Want to start a startup?  Get funded by
Y Combinator.




April 2001, rev. Hidden on Mysterious Island is the legendary Counterclockwise Crystal. April 2003(This article is derived from a talk given at the 2001 Franz
Developer Symposium.)
In the summer of 1995, my friend Robert Morris and I
started a startup called 
Viaweb.  
Our plan was to write
software that would let end users build online stores.
What was novel about this software, at the time, was
that it ran on our server, using ordinary Web pages
as the interface.A lot of people could have been having this idea at the
same time, of course, but as far as I know, Viaweb was
the first Web-based application.  It seemed such
a novel idea to us that we named the company after it:
Viaweb, because our software worked via the Web,
instead of running on your desktop computer.Another unusual thing about this software was that it
was written primarily in a programming language called
Lisp. It was one of the first big end-user
applications to be written in Lisp, which up till then
had been used mostly in universities and research labs. [1]The Secret WeaponEric Raymond has written an essay called "How to Become a Hacker,"
and in it, among other things, he tells would-be hackers what
languages they should learn.  He suggests starting with Python and
Java, because they are easy to learn.  The serious hacker will also
want to learn C, in order to hack Unix, and Perl for system
administration and cgi scripts.  Finally, the truly serious hacker
should consider learning Lisp:

  Lisp is worth learning for the profound enlightenment experience
  you will have when you finally get it; that experience will make
  you a better programmer for the rest of your days, even if you
  never actually use Lisp itself a lot.

This is the same argument you tend to hear for learning Latin.  It
won't get you a job, except perhaps as a classics professor, but
it will improve your mind, and make you a better writer in languages
you do want to use, like English.But wait a minute.  This metaphor doesn't stretch that far.  The
reason Latin won't get you a job is that no one speaks it.  If you
write in Latin, no one can understand you.  But Lisp is