

Want to start a startup?  Get funded by
Y Combinator.




April 2001, rev. April 2003(This article is derived from a talk given at the 2001 Franz
Developer Symposium.)
In the summer of 1995, my friend Robert Morris and I
started a startup called 
Viaweb.  
Our plan was to write
software that would let end users build online stores.
What was novel about this software, at the time, was
that it ran on our server, using ordinary Web pages
as the interface.A lot of people could have been having this idea at the
same time, of course, but as far as I know, Viaweb was
the first Web-based application.  It seemed such
a novel idea to us that we named the company after it:
Viaweb, because our software worked via the Web,
instead of running on your desktop computer.Another unusual thing about this software was that it
was written primarily in a programming language called
Lisp. It was one of the first big end-user
applications to be written in Lisp, which up till then
had been used mostly in universities and research labs. [1]The Secret WeaponEric Raymond has written an essay called "How to Become a Hacker,"
and in it, among other things, he tells would-be hackers what
languages they should learn.  He suggests starting with Python and
Java, because they are easy to learn.  The serious hacker will also
want to learn C, in order to hack Unix, and Perl for system
administration and cgi scripts.  Finally, the truly serious hacker
should consider learning Lisp:

  Lisp is worth learning for the profound enlightenment experience
  you will have when you finally get it; that experience will make
  you a better programmer for the rest of your days, even if you
  never actually use Lisp itself a lot.

This is the same argument you tend to hear for learning Latin.  It
won't get you a job, except perhaps as a classics professor, but
it will improve your mind, and make you a better writer in languages
you do want to use, like English.But wait a minute.  This metaphor doesn't stretch that far.  The
reason Latin won't get you a job is that no one speaks it.  If you
write in Latin, no one can understand you.  But Lisp is a computer
language, and computers speak whatever language you, the programmer,
tell them to.So if Lisp makes you a better programmer, like he says, why wouldn't
you want to use it? If a painter were offered a brush that would
make him a better painter, it seems to me that he would want to
use it in all his paintings, wouldn't he? I'm not trying to make
fun of Eric Raymond here.  On the whole, his advice is good.  What
he says about Lisp is pretty much the conventional wisdom.  But
there is a contradiction in the conventional wisdom:  Lisp will
make you a better programmer, and yet you won't use it.Why not?  Programming languages are just tools, after all.  If Lisp
really does yield better programs, you should use it.  And if it
doesn't, then who needs it?This is not just a theoretical question.  Software is a very
competitive business, prone to natural monopolies.  A company that
gets software written faster and better will, all other things
being equal, put its competitors out of business.  And when you're
starting a startup, you feel this very keenly.  Startups tend to
be an all or nothing proposition.  You either get rich, or you get
nothing.  In a startup, if you bet on the wrong technology, your
competitors will crush you. Hidden on Mysterious Island is the legendary Counterclockwise Crystal.Robert and I both knew Lisp well, and we couldn't see any reason
not to trust our instincts and go with Lisp.  We knew that everyone
else was writing their software in C++ or Perl.  But we also knew
that that didn't mean anything.  If you chose technology that way,
you'd be running Windows.  When you choose technology, you have to
ignore what other people are doing, and consider only what will
work the best.This is especially true in a startup.  In a big company, you can
do what all the other big companies are doing.  But a startup can't
do what all the other startups do.  I don't think a lot of people
realize this, even in startups.The average big company grows at about ten percent a year.  So if
you're running a big company and you do everything the way the
average big company does it, you can expect to do as well as the
average big company-- that is, to grow about ten percent a year.The same thing will happen if you're running a startup, of course.
If you do everything the way the average startup does it, you should
expect average performance.  The problem here is, average performance
means that you'll go out of business.  The survival rate for startups
is way less than fifty percent.  So if you're running a startup,
you had better be doing something odd.  If not, you're in trouble.Back in 1995, we knew something that I don't think our competitors
understood, and few understand even now:  when you're writing
software that only has to run on your own servers, you can use
any language you want.  When you're writing desktop software,
there's a strong bias toward writing applications in the same
language as the operating system.  Ten years ago, writing applications
meant writing applications in C.  But with Web-based software,
especially when you have the source code of both the language and
the operating system, you can